The IMC Prosperity 2025 competition was my first real exposure to the world of trading. Throughout each of the rounds, I learned more and more about the processes that made this up, and also how absolutely important the element of analysis was. In the competition, I only focused on the analysis of some signals and using them as determinants, ignoring how much more backtesting and exploring various approaches could have helped me. Over the course of the year, as I learned more about this, my goal became wanting to apply that knowledge by actually creating my own trading engine, replete with both signal processing and backtesting, to be able to construct something similar to the kind of constructions I have seen many quantitative analysts focus on as well.

Something that is also very important to me is being able to understand and implement things from scratch, and I found that doing this with machine learning models, some of which are heavily involved in this project, helped me understand the underlying concepts surrounding them. This also proved very helpful in realizing how data structures and algorithms all share commonalities that can be manipulated into usage for this and various other projects. In particular, learning about the tree-based modeling XGBoost employs and support vector modeling being able to parse large data sets fed into my comprehension of overall data analysis, which is invaluable to me.

I want to complete this project in stages, with my code improving and becoming much more concise as I begin to implement more and more of what I have learned. For now, StockBot is composed of:

1️⃣ Analysis of the closing prices of any stock over a particular period of time. I used rolling windows of 10 days each to support and work with the limitations of the API (Polygon.io) that I was using to scrape data. Using this information, I was able to determine simple moving averages, exponential moving averages, relative strength indices, and the Bollinger Bands of the closing prices. I used the Bollinger Band limitation of 2 standard deviations to catch outliers rather than the standard 1.5 used in many statistcal coverages, as I felt that the emphasis on financial data called for such a difference, and the precedence was already there because the technique has been using in trading analysis quite frequently. 

But I had another question: how would I interpret all this data?

Rather than just using one single machine learning model, I decided to compare and contrast using three approaches to help shape my predictions for future closing prices that would affect my decisions to trade. While engaging in this, I realized it would also be important to compare these approaches with and without the "outliers" of closing prices (those more than 2 standard deviations above or below the average relevant to that window of time). I settled on using a linear regression model, a support vector-adjacent one and a GARCH (1, 1) approach with a gradient ascent to calculate the maximum likelihood of error when assuming volatility. I then evaluted the effectiveness of each of these models by calculating the mean absolute error of each and modeling them. 

2️⃣ A trading engine. This would be where the actual decisions to buy or sell shares of a stock took place. I also included a PnL tracker and order book to keep track of historical and current value of the stock.

3️⃣Backtesting of both the models and the purported trades. As mentioned previously, I calculated the effectiveness of each model using their mean absolute errors, while also determining whether including or excluding the outliers made any tangible difference in predicting future trends or volatility. However, backtesting relies on having at least one absolute metric by which to measure success, and I chose the Sharpe ratio. Using the FRED API provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, I was able to determine such a ratio for the cases of both including outliers in by data and factoring them out to affect my decision.

Some of the most essential skills I learned while creating this first iteration of it based off of my IMC Prosperity 2025 work include the usage of Pandas and manually mimicking many of the models supplied in scikit-learn, applying statistical concepts to test the effectiveness of hypotheses, as well as being able to think about data in a geometric, dimensional space, and model ways to differentiate it based on that. I hope to implement many more techniques specific to trading analysis, such as modeling candlestick patterns and allowing a trading engine to determine how long to hold a position. In the end, StockBot is a work in progress and will probably remain one for a very long time, as I keep improving it based on what I have learned.
